proposal: seamless cluster migration (#3780)
karmada-io/karmada: docs/proposals/migration/design-of-seamless-cluster-migration-scheme.md

creation-date: 2023-07-08
---

# Proposal of seamless cluster migration

## Summary

- When users migrate a single cluster to multiple clusters, there is a common troublesome problem: how to handle the resources that already exist in the original cluster? In Most scenario, users hope that `Karmada` can maintain the previous running state of existing resources in the original cluster during the process of taking over the original cluster. We refer to this migration method as seamless migration.

- Currently, there are multiple ways for `Karmada` to achieve seamless migration, but the existing methods require operators to perceive the resources of the original cluster, require user intervention, and the user experience is not smooth enough.

- This proposal aims to achieve truly seamless migration by extending the `Karmada` custom resource API, ensuring that users are completely unaware during the migration process.

  

## Motivation

Users migrate a single cluster to multiple clusters, hoping that `Karmada` will take over the existing deployment or other resources of the original single cluster. During the migration process, users hope to achieve seamless switching, including:

> - **Pods that already exist during the entire migration process will not be restarted**.

Author: done

- When deploying Pod to a new cluster, there will be a verification process, and the number of Pod replicas in the original cluster will remain unchanged until the verification is completed.

- After the migration is completed, the total number of Pod replicas in all clusters remains unchanged.

> Karmada currently has two ways to achieve seamless migration as mentioned above:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Karmada currently provides two means to migrate resources from existing clusters to Karmada:
```

- **Method 1:** Call `karmadactl promote deployment xxx -C yyy` to take over the existing deployment and other resources in the original single cluster

> - **Method 2:** Manually write the `PropagationPolicy` and `ResourceTemplate` configurations and call the ApiServer interface of the Host cluster to apply the configuration. Noting that **it is necessary to add `work.karmada.io/conflict-resolution: overwrite` in the annotation of `ResourceTemplate`**, indicating that when there is a naming conflict resource in the member cluster, it will be forced taken over by overwriting the configuration **(if left blank, it will not be taken over by default)** 

Reviewer 2: it's not `the Host cluster`, but `karmada-apiserver`

> > Detailed practical steps can be found in: [Utilizing existing policy capabilities to achieve cluster migration](https://www.yuque.com/chaosi/pwzt9c/ypugrp6452lu36ok)

Reviewer: The link is dead.
In addition, please try to link documents from the Karmada community or a stable website.

Author: directly removed it

> The above methods all require **the migration of specific native resources that the operator perceives in the member cluster**. In some `CI/CD` automated pipeline scenarios, **the operator cannot manually modify native resource declarations such as `Deployment`, and the resources contained in the original cluster are also not visible to the operator**. This brings difficulties and challenges to achieving seamless migration.

Author: updated

### Goals

Explore how to enable `Karmada`  to achieve seamless cluster migration in a more perfect and universal way, to meet more complex user scenarios and achieve complete user insensitivity?

In detail, we are proposed to extend the API semantics of Karmada custom resources to support declaring how to take over a matching resource when there is a conflict in the member cluster.

### Non-Goals

If there is a conflict in the member cluster and the resource is not taken over during the conflict, how to ensure that the total number of replicas meets the expected `ResourceTemplate`? This follows the original logic and is not within the scope of this proposal discussion.

> > For example, the `ResourceTemplate` specifies that two replicas need to be evenly allocated to two member clusters. If member cluster 1 fails to allocate due to conflicts and does not take over, the proposal does not care about how to handle the failure issue.

Author: directly removed it.

They only need to write the following `PropagationPolicy`:

```yaml
 apiVersion: policy.karmada.io/v1alpha1
 kind: PropagationPolicy
 metadata:
   name: deployments-pp
 spec:
   conflictResolution: overwrite   ## Add a new field to indicate that when there is a naming conflict resource in the member cluster, it will be taken over by overwriting it
   placement:
     clusterAffinity:
       clusterNames:
       - member1
   priority: 0
   resourceSelectors:
   - apiVersion: apps/v1
     kind: Deployment
   schedulerName: default-scheduler
```

#### Story 2

Assuming that there are many deployments in the original single cluster, users hope that most of the deployments will be directly taken over by `Karmada`, but some special deployments ignore taking over when there are naming conflicts with resources in the member cluster. 

Users only need to add `conflict resolution` annotations in the `ResourceTemplate` for individual special `Deployments` based on the ` PropagationPolicy ` of ` story 1 `, for example:

```yaml
 apiVersion: apps/v1
 kind: Deployment
 metadata:
   name: nginx-deployment
   annotations:

>      work.karmada.io/conflict-resolution: ignore   ## Preserve the semantics of the original annotation and display the indication to ignore takeover when there are naming conflicts for resources in the member cluster

Author: I would change it to `skip-propagate`

 spec:
   selector:
     matchLabels:
       app: nginx
   replicas: 2
   template:
     metadata:
       labels:
         app: nginx
     spec:
       containers:
       - name: nginx
         image: nginx:latest
```

#### Story 3

Similarly, if multiple `Deployment` is defined in one `PropagationPolicy` , and users hope `Karmada` ignoring takeover the conflict `Deployment` by default, but forcing takeover individual specificed conflict `Deployment` :

> A feasible practice is to declare `conflictResolution: ignore` in the `PropagationPolicy` (or leave it blank), and annotate `work.karmada.io/conflict-resolution: overwrite` in the `ResourceTemplate`.

Author: thanks, this is just the significance of this proposal. In this case, you can write a `PropagationPolicy` with the filed `conflictResolution=overwrite` and a label selector to bind that a thousand `Deployment` to force taken over when conflicting.

the existence of annotation is just a compatible way for individual exceptions.

> A feasible practice is to declare `conflictResolution: ignore` in the `PropagationPolicy` (or leave it blank), and annotate `work.karmada.io/conflict-resolution: overwrite` in the `ResourceTemplate`.

Author: precisely, user should add `conflictResolution=overwrite` to all the `PropagationPolicy` about that a thodsand `Deployment`

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

If the `conflictResolution` field of the `PropagationPolicy` and the `conflict-resolution` annotation of the `ResourceTemplate` are specified in the same time, constraints below should be followed:

1. Priority effectiveness： `conflict-resolution` annotation in `ResourceTemplate`  **>** `conflictResolution` field in `PropagationPolicy`
2. Results corresponding to different pair values：

| PP \ RT             | not set   | ignore | overwrite | null or invalid |
|---------------------|-----------|--------|-----------|-----------------|
| **not set**         | ignore    | ignore | overwrite | ignore          |
| **ignore**          | ignore    | ignore | overwrite | ignore          |
| **overwrite**       | overwrite | ignore | overwrite | overwrite       |

> | **null or invalid** | ignore    | ignore | overwrite | ignore          |

Author: You're absolutely right ! thank you !

     metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
 
     // Spec represents the desired behavior of PropagationPolicy.
     // +required
     Spec PropagationSpec `json:"spec"`
 }
 
 // PropagationSpec represents the desired behavior of PropagationPolicy.
 type PropagationSpec struct {
     // conflictResolution how to resolve workload when resource template has conflicts with member clusters
     conflictResolution string `json:"conflictResolution,omitempty"`  // TODO add
     ...
 }
```

2、add `string` field `conflictResolution` to `ResourceBindingSpec`

```go
 type ResourceBinding struct {
     metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
     metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
 
     // Spec represents the desired behavior.
     Spec ResourceBindingSpec `json:"spec"`
 
     // Status represents the most recently observed status of the ResourceBinding.
     // +optional
     Status ResourceBindingStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
 }
 
 // ResourceBindingSpec represents the expectation of ResourceBinding.
 type ResourceBindingSpec struct {
     // conflictResolution how to resolve workload when resource template has conflicts with member clusters

>      conflictResolution string `json:"conflictResolution,omitempty"`    // TODO add

Reviewer 3: I don't think it is necessary to modify the api of `Work` and `ResourceBinding`, because they are invisible to users, and they can be declared through annotations.

Author: Good question, admire you for seeing this question at a glance.

I had the same opinion as you at the begining, honestly, there is no need to do it from the implementation perspective, no that modify even makes code more clean, but three reason changed my opinion:

1. we not only want to just solve the problem in this scenario, but also solemnly recommend the ability and practice of seamless migration to users. Adding this field to CRDs including `ResourceBinding` and `Work ` can more clearly demonstrate this ability to users than adding annotations.
2. adding annotations is just a **compatible** way for individual exceptions, even if we remove it, it's still justifiable. Assuming it doesn't exist, we still need to modify the api of `Work` and `ResourceBinding`. I mean, the annotation is just a addons, our desgin shouldn't overdependence on it.

hope for your more viewpoint about this question~

Reviewer 3: I think at least `ResourceBinding` doesn't need to be modified, because it can combine `PropagationPolicy`. but for `Work` API, I reserve my opinion and see if others think differently.

     ...
 }
```

3、add `string` field `conflictResolution` to `WorkSpec` 

```go
 type Work struct {
     metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
     metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
 
     // Spec represents the desired behavior of Work.
     Spec WorkSpec `json:"spec"`
 
     // Status represents the status of PropagationStatus.
     // +optional
     Status WorkStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
 }
 
 // WorkSpec defines the desired state of Work.
 type WorkSpec struct {
     // conflictResolution how to resolve workload when resource template has conflicts with member clusters
     conflictResolution string `json:"conflictResolution,omitempty"`   // TODO add
     
     // Workload represents the manifest workload to be deployed on managed cluster.
     Workload WorkloadTemplate `json:"workload,omitempty"`
 }
 
 type WorkloadTemplate struct {
     Manifests []Manifest `json:"manifests,omitempty"`
 }
 
 type Manifest struct {
     runtime.RawExtension `json:",inline"`
 }
```

### Process Logic

> 1、**ResourceDetector：** Reconcile ----> propagateResource ---->  ApplyClusterPolicy ----> BuildResourceBinding ----> CreateOrUpdate

Reviewer 2: If the code details are included, any related code updates will make this information outdated. Do we really need this?

Author: You're absolutely right ! thank you !

---
title: proposal of seamless cluster migration
authors:
- "@chaosi-zju"
reviewers:
- "@RainbowMango"
- TBD
approvers:
- "@RainbowMango"

> - TBD

Reviewer: Please pick reviewers from this PR conversation and put them on the reviewer list.
Then, remove TBD.

In detail, we are proposed to extend the API semantics of Karmada custom resources to support declaring how to take over a matching resource when there is a conflict in the member cluster.

### Non-Goals

If there is a conflict in the member cluster and the resource is not taken over during the conflict, how to ensure that the total number of replicas meets the expected `ResourceTemplate`? This follows the original logic and is not within the scope of this proposal discussion.

> For example, the `ResourceTemplate` specifies that two replicas need to be evenly allocated to two member clusters. If member cluster 1 fails to allocate due to conflicts and does not take over, the proposal does not care about how to handle the failure issue.

## Proposal

1. For custom resources such as `PropagationPolicy`, `ResourceBinding`, and `Work`, add a field called `conflictResolution`. The operator can use this field in the `PropagationPolicy` to specify how to take over the matched resource when there is a conflict in the member cluster.

2. The field `conflictResolution` has the following values:

>    * `overwrite` : continue to propogate the resource and overwrite the new configuration to member clusters

Reviewer 3: how to define `overwrite`? force update? but some filelds of some resources are immutable, even force update you will get an error, like `pod.spec.nodeName` etc. maybe you can only delete and recreate them. so I think you should clearly state in the documentation about how it works and what's its restriction.

   * `skip-propagate`: skip the propagating process and retain the previous configuration in member clusters (default value)

     

> Points worth supplementing：for native resources such as `ResourceTemplate`, preserve the `work.karmada.io/conflict-resolution: overwrite` annotation method. Users can add `conflict-resolution` annotations for specific resources in the `ResourceTemplate` to override the `conflictResolution` configuration of the `PropagationPolicy`.

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

> Assuming that there are many deployments in the original single cluster, and the user wants `Karmada` to fully take over all deployments.

Reviewer 2: I think it's better to point out what's the situation now and what users expect. Give an intuitive comparison.

Author: updated

     ...
 }
```

### Process Logic

1、**ResourceDetector：**

Change: Assign the `conflictResolution` value of `PropagationPolicy` to `ResourceBinding`/`ClusterResourceBinding`

2、**ResourceBinding Controller：**

Change: Update the value of the `conflict-resolution` annotation in `workload` based on the `conflictResolution` field and the original `conflict-resolution` annotation in `workload`

3、**Execution Controller：**

> Previous：determine whether the `work.karmada.io/conflict-resolution` annotation is included in the `workload` of `Work`. 
> Only with this annotation and a value of  `overwrite` will the `workload` be synchronized to member clusters

no changes

### Test Plan

Add e2e test cases:

1）Create a host cluster and member clusters, install `Karmada` in the host cluster, and joins the member clusters.

2）Creating a `Deployment` in a member cluster.

3）Create a `PropagationPolicy` and `ResourceTemplate` in the host cluster, and verify whether the takeover results of `Deployments` that
already exist in the member cluster match the expected values for the `conflictResolution` and other fields mentioned above.

<br/>

## Alternatives

### Abandon old annotation method

> **Q：Should the old annotation method be abandoned ?**

Reviewer 4: Can you specify which old annotation is being referred to?

```

#### Story 4

Similarly, if multiple `Deployment` is defined in one `PropagationPolicy` , and users hope `Karmada` ignoring takeover the conflict `Deployment` by default, but forcing takeover individual specificed conflict `Deployment` :

A feasible practice is to declare `conflictResolution: Abort` in the `PropagationPolicy` (or leave it blank), and annotate `work.karmada.io/conflict-resolution: overwrite` in the `ResourceTemplate`.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

If the `conflictResolution` field of the `PropagationPolicy` and the `conflict-resolution` annotation of the `ResourceTemplate` are specified in the same time, constraints below should be followed：

1、Priority effectiveness： `conflict-resolution` annotation in `ResourceTemplate`  **>** `conflictResolution` field in `PropagationPolicy`

2、Results corresponding to different pair values：

| PP \ RT            | not set / null | abort | overwrite |
| ------------------ | -------------- | ----- | --------- |
| **not set / null** | abort          | abort | overwrite |
| **Abort**          | abort          | abort | overwrite |
| **Overwrite**      | overwrite      | abort | overwrite |

> > PP refer to PropagationPolicy ，RT refer to ResourceTemplate 

Reviewer 4: It is recommended to also explain the situation of ClusterPropagationPolicy.

### Risks and Mitigations

none

> <br/>

Reviewer 4: Redundant?

## Design Details

### API Modify

1、add `string` field `conflictResolution` to `PropagationSpec`

```go
 type PropagationPolicy struct {
     metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
     metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
 
     // Spec represents the desired behavior of PropagationPolicy.
     // +required
     Spec PropagationSpec `json:"spec"`

>  }

Reviewer 4: This part can be omitted, and ClusterPropagationPolicy also uses PropagationSpec.

     ...
 }
```

### Process Logic

1、**ResourceDetector：**

Change: Assign the `conflictResolution` value of `PropagationPolicy` to `ResourceBinding`/`ClusterResourceBinding`

2、**ResourceBinding Controller：**

Change: Update the value of the `conflict-resolution` annotation in `workload` based on the `conflictResolution` field and the original `conflict-resolution` annotation in `workload`

3、**Execution Controller：**

> Previous：determine whether the `work.karmada.io/conflict-resolution` annotation is included in the `workload` of `Work`. 
> Only with this annotation and a value of  `overwrite` will the `workload` be synchronized to member clusters

no changes

### Test Plan

Add e2e test cases:

1）Create a host cluster and member clusters, install `Karmada` in the host cluster, and joins the member clusters.

2）Creating a `Deployment` in a member cluster.

3）Create a `PropagationPolicy` and `ResourceTemplate` in the host cluster, and verify whether the takeover results of `Deployments` that
already exist in the member cluster match the expected values for the `conflictResolution` and other fields mentioned above.

> <br/>

Reviewer 4: Redundant?

1、Priority effectiveness： `conflict-resolution` annotation in `ResourceTemplate`  **>** `conflictResolution` field in `PropagationPolicy`

2、Results corresponding to different pair values：

| PP \ RT            | not set / null | skip-propagate | overwrite |
| ------------------ | -------------- | -------------- | --------- |
| **not set / null** | skip-propagate | skip-propagate | overwrite |
| **skip-propagate** | skip-propagate | skip-propagate | overwrite |
| **overwrite**      | overwrite      | skip-propagate | overwrite |

> PP refer to PropagationPolicy ，RT refer to ResourceTemplate 

### Risks and Mitigations

none

<br/>

## Design Details

### API Modify

1、add `string` field `conflictResolution` to `PropagationSpec`

```go
 type PropagationPolicy struct {
     metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
     metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
 
     // Spec represents the desired behavior of PropagationPolicy.
     // +required
     Spec PropagationSpec `json:"spec"`
 }
 
 // PropagationSpec represents the desired behavior of PropagationPolicy.
 type PropagationSpec struct {

>      // conflictResolution how to resolve workload when resource template has conflicts with member clusters

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
     // ConflictResolution how to resolve workload when resource template has conflicts with member clusters
```

* compatible
* Prevent individual special situations against `conflictResolution` value of `PropagationPolicy`, give user more flexibility to define configuration.

### Less API modify

**Q:  Whether is needed to modify the api of `ResourceBinding` and `Work` ?** 

A：Honestly, there is no need to modify the api of `ResourceBinding` and `Work` from the implementation perspective (`conflictResolution` can be declared through annotations either). No such api modify even makes code more clean, but two reasons are under my consideration:

1）We not only want to just meet the scenario in above stories, but also solemnly recommend the ability and practice of seamless migration to users. Adding this field to CRDs including `ResourceBinding` and `Work ` can more clearly demonstrate this ability to users than adding annotations.

2）Adding annotations is just a **compatible** way for individual exceptions, even if we remove it, it's still justifiable. Assuming it doesn't exist, we still need to modify the api of `ResourceBinding` and `Work`. I mean, the annotation is just a addons, our desgin shouldn't overdependence on it.

> 

Reviewer 6: Will you provide a cmd to promote a cluster or clusters at one time, like "karmadactl promote -A -n default -c member1"?

Reviewer 2: It's great idea!

Author: great idea, but I prefer to follow up this capability with other issues~
